Re-thinking feature branch deployments (#283)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2020-06/rethinking-feature-branch-deployments/index.md

---
title: Re-thinking feature branch deployments
description: Feature branches should be tested prior to merging into master.  All too often, companies have a single static test environment.  
author: bob.walker@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2020-12-31
metaImage:
bannerImage:
tags:
 - Engineering
 - Database Deployments
---

> I transitioned to Git in 2013.  Since that time, I have been doing feature branch testing all wrong.  The problem was, I worked in places with the same static environments, **{{Dev, Test, Staging, Production}}**.  Each environment had one instance of my application, and they all reflected what was in the `master` branch.  The only way for QA to test a new feature was to merge code into `master`.  I should have been standing up a sandbox for the feature branch for QA to test.  The **{{Dev, Test, Staging, Production}}** lifecycle represented my pre-Git life.  In this article, I will walk through how I’ve adjusted my thinking to better leverage Git.

Reviewer: It would be worth calling out that the process discusses here is feature branch specific rather than git specific. For example, continuous integration is an option in git (and, by some standards, the more desirable option - see https://martinfowler.com/articles/branching-patterns.html#continuous-integration).

Author: Fair enough, I'm adding a section at the top explaining what the article focuses on along with a brief explanation of the pros and cons to either.  I left it at "they are not mutually exclusive, pick which works best for you, do one, or do both"

Author: Added that section at the top of the article

### What is the point of the dev environment?

Most places I worked the `Dev` environment was rarely used.  It didn’t have very much data to test with.  It was almost always down, and no one really used it.  It was just there.  Some teams ran automated tests against it, but the results were typically ignored because the data was so out of date.  If a deployment failed, we would band-aid a solution so it could get to the `Test` environment so QA could continue working.  

`Dev` was always a rubber stamp environment.  

## Re-thinking environments for feature branch deployments

`Production` and `Staging` aren’t going anywhere, nor should they, but `Dev` and `Test` need to be completely re-thought.

- Combine `Dev` and `Test` into one environment: `Test`.
- When a new feature branch is checked in, new infrastructure for that feature branch is spun-up in `Test`.  
- Subsequent check-ins for that feature branch will go to that infrastructure.
- By default, all applications in `Test` use the `Staging` instance of their dependent applications.  This can be overwritten to point to `Test` when work on 1 to N applications is tightly coupled.

> - When the feature branch is merged into master, the testing infrastructure is torn down, and the deployment pushes code to `Staging`.

Reviewer: I was a little unclear about the process discussed here. Merging dev and test seems like a reasonable idea, but from the steps outlined here it seems like a merge from a feature branch into master automatically triggers a deployment to staging?

If so, this workflow tends to overlook the potential for merge conflicts. With multiple people merging feature branches, you may well end up with master in a broken state, and testing feature branches in isolation will never be able to guarantee that these conflicts don't arise. In this case the test environment provides a way to resolve conflicts before cutting a production-like release.

Author: Good point, I'll flesh this out a bit.

Although, I see the number of merge conflicts being reduced with this workflow.  When I worked on a team with 20+ developers, we were working on 4 to 5 features at once.  We all had to check into master to get tested.  Testers would find bugs or changes to be made, so we'd make the change in another branch, merge that into master and wait for the next batch of changes to come in.  Typically 20-30 a day.  We'd have merge conflicts all the dang time.  The chances of all 4 or 5 features being done on the same day is unlikely.

Author: Added another section after these bullet points explaining merge conflicts and the need for developers to constantly merge master into their branch.

- After final verification and sign-off, the code is pushed to `Production`.

The lifecycles will be:

- Default: **{{Staging, Production}}**
- Feature Branch: `Test`

Unfinished code will no longer be merged into master.  This will make scheduling a release much easier.  What is in master has been signed off by QA and any Business or Product Owners.  You could merge Feature A into master on Monday, deploy on Tuesday, then merge Feature B into master on Wednesday and deploy on Friday.  Each deployment will be much smaller, as well.

> The same holds true for bug fixes.  They will be treated as feature branches.  When a bug-fix branch is checked in, new infrastructure is stood up to verify the fix actually fixes the issue.  When it is ready to go, it is merged into master and pushed up to `Staging`.  

Reviewer: I think the terminology of `hot-fix` branch is more common than `bug-fix` - https://martinfowler.com/articles/branching-patterns.html#hotfix-branch

Author: Ah good point, I'll update.

Author: I'll update, thanks

Author: Updated

If you are using Gitflow, you could configure the build server to kick off releases to `Staging` when a change is checked into a release branch.  

## External Services

In this configuration, the `Staging` environment matches `Production` as closely as possible, which means it should be stable.  The only time `Staging` varies from `Production` is prior to a `Production` deployment.

> As a rule of thumb, all the services in `Test` which are dependent on external services should point to `Staging`.  There are cases where multiple applications are being changed for release, and the changes are all tightly coupled together.  In that specific instance, the applications would point to specific feature branch services on `Test`.  Essentially, it is a sandbox of sandboxes.

Reviewer: This is a little trickier than it might seem, as microservices will have both upstream and downstream dependencies. You could easily point a service to a downstream dependency in staging, but having upstream staging services direct traffic to your test service is quite a bit more difficult.

Uber did a detailed blog post on this topic at https://eng.uber.com/multitenancy-microservice-architecture/.

Author: I see your point.  I'll flesh this section out a bit more explaining some approaches to take.  I can see multi-tenancy being a lever to pull, but I probably wouldn't pull it at first.

Author: Fleshed this out quite a bit

 - Database Deployments
---

> I transitioned to Git in 2013.  Since that time, I have been doing feature branch testing all wrong.  The problem was, I worked in places with the same static environments, **{{Dev, Test, Staging, Production}}**.  Each environment had one instance of my application, and they all reflected what was in the `master` branch.  The only way for QA to test a new feature was to merge code into `master`.  In a perfect world I would stood up a sandbox for the feature branch for QA to test.  The **{{Dev, Test, Staging, Production}}** lifecycle represented my pre-Git life.  In this article, I will walk through how I’ve adjusted my thinking to better leverage Git.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I transitioned to Git in 2013.  Since that time, I have been doing feature branch testing all wrong.  The problem was, I worked in places with the same static environments, **{{Dev, Test, Staging, Production}}**.  Each environment had one instance of my application, and they all reflected what was in the `master` branch.  The only way for QA to test a new feature was to merge code into `master`.  In a perfect world, I would stand up a sandbox for the feature branch for QA to test.  The **{{Dev, Test, Staging, Production}}** lifecycle represented my pre-Git life.  In this article, I walk through how I’ve adjusted my thinking to better leverage Git.
```
